# Why Are There So Many RDF Formats?

RDF is an abstract tool for describing graphs. Because it is abstract, it can be rendered in a number of different formats. RDF refers to the abstract framework, while each format has its own particular structure. Note that from the standpoint of RDF, each of these formats are equivalent to one another - if you express RDF in one format, you should be able to transform it to another format (or __serialization__) that can in turn be interpreted (or __parsed__) back into a common internal format. 

Because of this, RDF is becoming increasingly commonly used as a general data description format, regardless of whether the environment uses JSON, XML, Turtle (a specialized language), CSV (for  spreadsheets), YAML, or even HTML. 

Each format has its own advantages (and disadvantages):

* __RDF-XML.__ This is an XML variant of RDF, that also takes advantage of the RDF Schema language to describe specific data structures. Because XML was developed around the same time as RDF, RDF-XML was also used fairly heavily by OWL (the Web Ontology Language), which is a language for describing logical inferences. For this reason is it not uncommon to see rdf-xml files referred to as __OWL files__, even if they don't actually contain any OWL content.

* __Turtle.__ In 2007, the SPARQL language was first developed as a way of querying RDF. It turned out that its notation was considerably more condensed than using XML, and eventually, the __Terse RDF Language__ (__Turtle__) was standardized as a way of describing RDF, becoming a formal specification in 2013. If you are working with RDF on a regular basis, learning Turtle is probably a skill worth acquiring.
* __JSON-LD.__ The same year that SPARQL and Turtle first emerged, there was a dramatic shift in programming circles with the rise of JSON (Javascript Object Notation) largely as a reaction against the perceived programmer unfriendliness of XML. In 2010, work began on a JSON-based RDF profile called __JSON-Linked Data__ (__JSON-LD__), which was formalized in 2014. JSON-LD made use of condensed namespaces and a special convention for specifying a __context__ (namespace prefix declarations). The specific context sections were consequently referred to as __Context Files__, with the rest of the content of JSON-LD files forming the graph of information.
* __Neo4J, LPGs and OpenCypher__. Another effort for encoding graphs was made with the introduction of Neo4J, which became the category leader for a specialized graph format called __Labeled Property Graphs__ or __LPGs__. Unlike RDF, which assumed that the predicate was a general term, LPGs assumed that the property could hold a bag of literal properties. While this meant that properties could be overloaded for specific relationships (Neo4J was billed as schema-less for this reason, though any graph is theoretically schema-less because schemas are usually treated as triples as well). In 2015, __Cypher__, Neo4J's language for describing and querying graphs, was made open source and renamed __OpenCypher__. This is not part of the __W3C Stack__.
* __RDF-Star.__ In the late 2010s, an initiative was begun to resolve a problem that went back to the early days of RDF, specifically, the issue of __Reification__. A reification is the process of assigning the three parts of a triple (_subject_, _predicate_, and object) collectively to a data structure that can then be associated with an identifier called a __reifier__. This was done under the auspices of the RDF-Star working group, and this enhanced format has become known as RDF-Star.
* __RDF-Star and LPGs.__ One advantage of reifiers is that they can consequently describe or _annotate_ individual triples, rather than classes of relationships as RDF does. One consequence of this was that it made it possible to make RDF and LPGs compatible with one another, as OpenCypher essentially creates a hidden reifier. Ironically this actually makes RDF-Star a superset of LPGs, as there are structures that can now be expressed in RDF-Star that couldn't (easily) in RDF by itself. Turtle-Star is a modified version of Turtle that has better notation for RDF-Star. 

[[Home]](README.md)

[[Next]](what-is-owl.md)